 CHAPTER 5 l DATA MINING AND WAREHOUSE SYSTEMS

 5Data Mining
         and Warehouse
CHAPTER WSyhsatetmis Esthics

LEARNING OUTCOMES

By the end of this chapter, you should be able to:

1. Define data mining and warehouse systems;
2. Explain the concepts of Oracle used in Data Warehouse;
3. Describe the usage of Sybase warehousing; and
4. Explain some of the IBM methods used in warehousing.

                                                                   94
            DATA MINING AND WAREHOUSE SYSTEMS l CHAPTER 5

INTRODUCTION

Traditionally, enterprise data has been kept in information silos that are physically separate
from other data repositories and serve specialised functions. Enterprise-wide reporting
was difficult at best, requiring multiple data extracts and reformulation. All this data
manipulation extracted a high cost in terms of accuracy and timeliness. Fortunately, the
technology sector has anted up new data warehousing and mining tools to provide assistance.
Visit the link below to view the new release of Oracle warehouse builder.

                                Source: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WOo6VQ89JzM

5.1 Oracle

Oracle database is a comprehensive database platform for Data Warehousing and business
intellect that combines industry-leading scalability and performance, deeply integrated
analytics, and embedded integration and data quality, all in a single platform running
on a reliable, low-cost grid infrastructure.

Oracle database 11g offers best-of-breed         Figure 5.1: Functionality of oracle
functionality for Data Warehouses and
data marts, with confirmed scalability
to 100's of terabytes and record-
breaking performance. It also provides
an exclusively integrated platform for
analytics; by embedding OLAP, Data
Mining, and statistical capabilities
directly into the database, Oracle delivers
all of the functionality of standalone
analytic engines with the enterprise
scalability, security and reliability of an
Oracle Database. as shown in Figure 5.1.

Ever since data integration is a core requirement of any Data Warehouse, Oracle Database
11g includes Oracle Warehouse Builder, a leading ETL tool that utilises Oracle's scalable
data transformation and heterogeneous data-access capabilities.

Oracle's Data Warehouse solutions are now extended to hardware components with Oracle
exadata. Oracle provides a unique data storage solution, exadata storage servers, for
high-performance warehousing, and provides complete Data Warehouse configuration with
HP Oracle database machine. In addition, Oracle optimised warehouse initiative offers
customers choice of references configuration and optimised warehouse systems from
multiple hardware vendors.

                                             95
 CHAPTER 5 l DATA MINING AND WAREHOUSE SYSTEMS

   5.1.1 Hardware

Foundation of solid Data Warehouse solution is a scalable, high-performance hardware
infrastructure. One of the challenges for Data Warehouses were to deliver the I/O
bandwidth necessary for large-scale queries, especially as data volumes and user
workloads have continued to increase. Oracle exadata provides uniquely optimised
storage solution for Data Warehousing which delivers order of- magnitude performance
gains for large-scale Data Warehouse queries.
There are two members of the Oracle exadata product family. The foundation of exadata
family of products is Oracle® exadata storage server, which is used to build Data
Warehousing solutions using customer supplied database servers and infrastructure. The
second member of the exadata product family is the HP Oracle database machine.
This database machine is a complete and fully integrated solution for Data Warehousing
that includes all the components to quickly and easily deploy an enterprise Data
Warehouse. In this chapter we are discussing about Oracle exadata storage server and
their functionalities.

   5.1.2 Oracle Exadata Storage Server

It is database storage device running the exadata storage server software provided by
Oracle. The hardware components of exadata storage server were carefully chosen to match
needs of high performance query processing, and is based on HP ProLiant DL180 G5
server. It comes preconfigured with: two Intel 2.66 GHz quad-core processors, 12 disks
connected to a smart array storage controller with 512K of nonvolatile cache, 8 GB memory,
dual port InfiniBand connectivity, management card for remote access, all the software
preinstalled, and can be installed in a typical 19-inch rack.
Two types of exadata storage server are offered as shown in Figure 5.2.

    The first is based on 300 GB Serial Attached SCSI (SAS) drives. This version
    provides approximately 1 TB of uncompressed user data capacity, and 1 GB/second
    of data bandwidth per server.

    The second version of the Exadata cell is based on 1 TB Serial Advanced Technology
    Attachment (SATA) drives and provides approximately 3.3 TB of uncompressed data
    capacity, and 750 MB/second data bandwidth. When data in the database is compressed,
    bandwidth delivered by each cell increases 2 to 3 times.

                                       Figure 5.2: Two types of exadata storage server

                                                                   96
                                                DATA MINING AND WAREHOUSE SYSTEMS l CHAPTER 5

Integrate

Recent day's information architecture is much more dynamic than it was just a few years
ago. Businesses now demand more information, they want it sooner and they are delivering
more analytics to an ever-widening set of users and applications.

   5.1.3 Oracle Warehouse Builder

To deal with these business requirements, Oracle database 11g includes a leading data-
integration tool, Oracle Warehouse Builder (OWB). The core features of OWB are included
as a no-cost database feature, and OWB additionally has four options for specific
integration requirements as illustrated in Figure 5.3.

 Base product
 The base product is designed to allow any Oracle customer to efficiently build a data mart
 or data warehouse, of any size or complexity. It includes an enterprise-ready multi-user
 metadata repository, data-modeling capabilities, and wide variety of transformation and
 extraction techniques, and the performance and scalability of an `ELT' architecture.

 Enterprise ETL option
 This option is specifically geared to increase performance and productivity, and include
 the following features:

        Advanced data load options.
        Developer productivity through reusable components.
        Embedded slowly changing dimension management.
        End to end data lineage and impact analysis.
        Support for advanced configuration management.

 Data quality option
 As a fully integrated part of the product, a very distinct advantage over all other tools
 in the market, the data quality option provides support for data profiling, data rules
 (in essence business rules) and information compliance features.

 Connectors
 It provides optimised access for leading operational applications. Oracle provides
 connectors for Oracle e-Business Suite, Siebel (CRM), People soft enterprise, and
 SAP R/3. An advantage of OWB is the breadth of functionality that it provides
 integrated within a single tool. Data modeling, data compliance, and data quality
 are core features that any enterprise data integration tools must possess. Any how,
 a key architectural advantage of Oracle warehouse builder is the integration of the
 components. Oracle warehouse builder gives all of its capabilities within a common
 repository and user interface.

             Figure 5.3: Four options for specific integration requirements of Oracle warehouse builder

By providing all of these capabilities in a single tool on top of a single storage area, OWB
resolves a long-standing challenge in data integration. Many integration solutions provide
separate tools for these distinct capabilities. However, it is terribly inefficient to do data-

                                                                   97
 CHAPTER 5 l DATA MINING AND WAREHOUSE SYSTEMS

modelling in one tool, and then ETL mapping in another tool, and then data profiling in yet
another tool. OWB provides one metadata repository and one UI for the entire integration
process.
Extract-Load-Transform (ELT) architecture is used by Oracle warehouse builder rather than
providing an external data-transformation engine, OWB executes all of its transformations
within an Oracle database leveraging the scalability and performance of the database
platform.

   5.1.4 Key Database Integration Features

Oracle database has broad set of loading, extraction and transformation capabilities. These
features are leveraged by OWB, but can be used in any environment in which data is being
integrated into an Oracle data warehouse. These features are listed in Figure 5.4.

       Database gateways for accessing non-Oracle systems.

        Loader utility for fast data loads of flat files.

        SQL extensions for data transformations: MERGE statement.

        Table functions: Efficient parallel user-defined transformations.

        Change data capture for low-latency log-based capture from Oracle databases.

                                       Figure 5.4: Features of key database integration

   5.1.5 Perform

Oracle provides performance optimisations for each type of data warehouse environment.
Data warehouse workloads are often complex, with different users running vastly
different operations, with different expectations and requirements for query performance. The
needs for data warehouse performance are as follows:

   · A broad set of performance optimisation techniques for every type of query and
       workload.

   · A sophisticated resource manager for ensuring performance even in databases with
       complex, heterogeneous workload. Database resource manager allows end-users to be
       grouped into `resource consumer groups' and DBA can control exactly how resources
       are allocated to each group. For each group, the DBA can control the amount of CPU

                                                                   98
                                            DATA MINING AND WAREHOUSE SYSTEMS l CHAPTER 5

   utilisation, as well as specify policies for proactive query governing and for
   query queuing.

· Unique, patented read-consistency model to make sure that data loads never impact
   query performance. Oracle solves the challenges of concurrent access through a
   technology called multi-version read consistency. This unique technology has been
   the foundation of Oracle's concurrency model for over 15 years.

· Multi-version read consistency guarantees that a user always sees a consistent view
   of the data requested. If another user changes the underlying data during query
   execution (such a trickle-feed update of a large data warehouse table), Oracle
   maintains a version of the data as it existed at the time the query began. Data
   returned to the query always reflects the state of the database (including all
   committed transactions) at the point in time at which the query was submitted
   regardless of what other updates may be occurring while the query is running. With
   this technology, Oracle is uniquely positioned to handle near real-time data loads
   within data warehouse environments.

· Management Packs to automate the constant performance tuning of a Data Warehouse.
   One of the most exciting new performance features in Oracle database 11g is OLAP-
   based materialised views. Conventional performance-tuning methods for star schemas
   within data warehouses involved the use of summary tables (or materialised views).
   Using this approach, the performance of queries is improved by pre-computing one or
   more summaries and storing those summaries in the data warehouse. These summaries
   are completely transparent to the application, since database provides `query
   rewrite' capabilities in which a query against a base set of star-schema tables is
   rewritten to access summary data.

· One challenge with materialised views is that a single star schema can have thousands
   or even millions of possible aggregations that could be stored as summary tables. It
   is not practical to create materialised view for every possible aggregation because
   space utilisation and maintenance costs would be too high. However, this situation can
   be resolved with OLAP-based materialised views.

· An OLAP-based materialised view leverages the OLAP data structures, in which all
   possible aggregations can be quickly retrieved. Thus, a star schema with an OLAP-
   based materialised view provides performance of a star schema with thousands
   of relational materialised views but with a single easy-to-manage OLAP cube that
   is highly compressed and provides efficient update capabilities. This application
   of OLAP technology to general-purpose data warehouse workloads is unique to
   Oracle. While previous OLAP solutions were accessed via an OLAP-based API,
   Oracle OLAP delivers performance benefits of OLAP to all data warehouse users
   using any SQL-based tool.

                                                              99
CHAPTER 5 l DATA MINING AND WAREHOUSE SYSTEMS

5.1.6 Scale

Size of the biggest data warehouses is growing                          PartitioningParallelism
exponentially. Today, more and more business                                   Compression
processes are becoming more completely automated                       Capabilities
and more data is collected at granular levels,                           to enable
so these data volume increases show no signs of                         scalability
abating. Oracle database 11g provides four key
capabilities to enable scalability: partitioning,                        Clustering
compression, clustering, and parallelism as        Figure 5.5: Four key capabilities of database 11g
illustrated in Figure 5.5.

5.1.7 Partitioning

Oracle Partitioning is necessary for managing large databases. This enables a "divide and
conquer" technique for managing large tables in database, especially as those tables grow.
Although a database may have twice as much data next year as it does today, end-users are
not going to tolerate their application running twice as slow. Even the database is not
going to be given twice as much time to complete maintenance and batch processing, and the
IT managers are not going to double the hardware budget for Data Warehouse.

Partitioning is the feature that allows a database to scale for very large datasets while
maintaining reliable performance, without unduly increasing administrative or hardware
resources. Partitioning breaks up large tables up into smaller pieces, and thus allows data
management windows and many end-user queries to be maintained at constant performance level
even as the data grows.

Oracle has been developing this partitioning technology for over 10 years, since its
introduction in Oracle8. In Oracle database 11g, Oracle provides 9 methods for
partitioning tables, along with the capability for DBA's to define custom partitioning
schemes a rich set of administrative commands for partitioned tables and a partition
adviser to guide administrators on how best to implement partitioning.

Partitioning enables ILM ("Information Lifecycle Management") strategies within the
Oracle database. When partitioning a single table, it can be distributed across multiple
storage tiers. Old, less-frequently accessed data, corresponding to older partitions, can
be stored on less expensive storage devices. For large databases, this approach can provide
significant cost savings.

5.1.8 Compression

Since its introduction in Oracle9i database release 2, compression has grown to be one of

                    100
                                                DATA MINING AND WAREHOUSE SYSTEMS l CHAPTER 5

the most popular features for data warehouse customers. As customers look to store larger
volumes of data, compression is a natural solution. Oracle's compression algorithms provides
a unique mechanism for compressing data stored in relational tables with virtually no
negative impact on query performance. With typical compression ratios ranging from 2:1 to 5:1,
the popularity of this feature comes as no surprise.

In Oracle database 11g, compression has been improved to support frequent, small updates
and inserts. In previous releases, data was compressed when inserted into a table using
`direct-path' operations (`bulk' operations in which thousands of rows are inserted when using
a single SQL statement or when using the load utility). For smaller updates and inserts into
a compressed table, the new data would not be compressed in these earlier releases. This new
enhancement in 11g brings the benefits of compression to data warehouse tables, which are
`trickle-fed' or otherwise, updated frequently.

   5.1.9 Real Application Clusters

Clusters facilitate a single database to scale across multiple servers. RAC provides a
solution to data warehousing, to `scale-out' to grow to hundreds of CPU's. The architecture
of RAC provides unique features and benefits for Oracle data warehousing. In addition to
the capability of adding additional raw computing power to a data warehouse system, RAC
also enables high-availability against node failure.

RAC also delivers a remarkable amount of flexibility for managing multiple workloads
within a single database. By using `RAC services', different applications could be
assigned to separate services, which in return can run on separate nodes of a cluster.
For example, data mart users could be assigned to one set of nodes while ETL operations
could be assigned to another set of nodes. Main advantage of RAC is the ability to
dynamically change and adjust these workloads. One could dynamically allocate more nodes
to ETL processing at night time, for example, while reallocating those nodes to query
processing during the day.

Parallelism

Parallelism is facility to leverage multiple processors towards execution of a single
database operation. Oracle's scalable parallel execution architecture dynamically adjusts
to meet all user demands. For large operations, Oracle parallelises database operations
across all available nodes and CPU's. For smaller operations, Oracle dynamically adjusts
the parallelism to maximise overall system throughput while the database resource manager
ensure that high-priority operations continue to get appropriate resources.

Analyse

Technologies such as OLAP, data mining and statistics, are hardly new to data warehousing
and business intelligence. However, OLAP products typically have their own calculation

                                                                  101
 CHAPTER 5 l DATA MINING AND WAREHOUSE SYSTEMS

engine, statistics products have their own data engine, and data mining products have
their own mining engines. In short, an enterprise-wide business intelligence environment
would maintain at least four different types of `data engines', each requiring their own
servers, their own management infrastructure, their own security administration, their own
high-availability infrastructure as shown in Figure 5.6.

          Figure 5.6: Different types of data engines of enterprise-wide business intelligence environment

Each engine has its own API's and its own set of developer tools and end-user tools. The
cost and complexity of replicating entire stacks of BI technologies is significant.
Oracle database provides a completely different approach by integrating OLAP, data mining,
and statistics inside the database engine. Instead of moving data from a Data Warehouse to
other analytic engines for further analysis, Oracle has instead brought advance analytic
algorithms into its database, where data resides.
Moreover, Oracle provides SQL access to all of its analytics, so that they can be implemented
with any SQL-based tool or application environment. Beyond considerable advantages of
rationalising back-end data architecture of an enterprise business intelligence environment,
the integration of analytics within the Oracle database provides a host of advantages
unavailable to standalone environments.
For example, does your stand alone OLAP server scale to hundreds of CPU's or clusters
of servers? How easily does your data-mining engine integrate into your user authentication
server? And can it transparently implement all of your data security policies? How easily
can you integrate the results of your statistical analysis with your Data Warehouse data?
All of these issues are solved Within Oracle database, simply due to the deep integration
of OLAP, data mining and statistics.

  5.1.10 Data Mining
Oracle data mining is powerful software entrenched in the Oracle database that enables

                                                                  102
                DATA MINING AND WAREHOUSE SYSTEMS l CHAPTER 5

you to discover new insights hidden in your data. This method helps businesses to target
their best customers, find and prevent fraud, discover the most influential attributes
that affect Key Performance Indicators (KPIs), and find valuable new information hidden
in the data. Oracle data Mining helps technical professionals find patterns in their
data, discover new clusters and associations, identify key attributes, and uncover valuable
insights.

To address these business problems, Oracle data mining allows companies to find new

information from their data using a wide range of state-of-the-art algorithms. Algorithms

used by data mining methods are machine-

learning techniques for analysing data to               Data mining
discover patterns and relationships. Oracle              algorithms
provides multiple algorithms since different

algorithms are effective for different types

of analysis and different business problems.

Majority data mining algorithms can be broadly          Supervised  Unsupervised
separated into "Supervised Learning" and                  learning      learning
"Unsupervised Learning" data mining
techniques as shown in Figure 5.7.                      Figure 5.7: Classification of data mining algorithms

Naive Bayes     Decision Tree                           Supervised learning requires data analyst
                                                        to identify a target attribute or dependent
Supervised                                              variable (for example, customers who
  learning                                              bought a specific product). Supervised-
                                                        learning technique then sifts through data
algorithms                                              trying to find patterns and relationships
                                                        between other attributes and the target
Support Vector  General Linear                          attribute (for example, the characteristics
    Machines         Models                             that indicate whether a prospective
                                                        customer is likely to buy a specific
Figure 5.8: Features of supervised learning algorithms  product). Supervised learning algorithms
                                                        with Oracle Data Mining include Naive Bayes,
                                                        Decision Tree, General Linear Models, and
                                                        Support Vector Machines as shown in
                                                        Figure 5.8.

Other category of data-mining algorithms is for "unsupervised learning." In these
scenarios, there is no `target attribute' instead the data mining algorithms seek
to find associations and clusters in the data independent of any a priorly defined
business objective. These algorithms include Enhanced k-means clustering, Orthogonal
partitioning clustering, Association rules (market basket analysis), and Nonnegative
matrix factorisation as shown in Figure 5.9.

                                              103
CHAPTER 5 l DATA MINING AND WAREHOUSE SYSTEMS

Enhanced k-means   Unsupervised                     Orthogonal partitioning
       clustering      learning                               clustering

Enhanced k-means     algorithms                       Non-negative matrix
       clustering                                           factorisation

                                 Figure 5.9: Features of unsupervised learning algorithms

Oracle data mining includes Oracle data miner, a graphical user interface for data analysts
to build, evaluate, and apply data mining models. Oracle data miner guides the data analyst
through the data mining process with complete flexibility and presents results in graphical
and tabular formats. Oracle data miner can generate the PL/SQL code associated with a mining
activity.

   SELF-CHECK

                Define Oracle data warehouse and also point out the unique features and
                methods used by Oracle data warehouse.

5.2 Sybase

Sybase became the number two database system behind Oracle, after making a deal with
Microsoft to share the source code for Microsoft to remarket on the OS/2 platform as
"SQL Server". At the time, Sybase called the database server "Sybase SQL Server". Until
version 4.9, Sybase and Microsoft SQL server were virtually identical.

The big difference is that Sybase has a Unix heritage, while Microsoft was adapted and

optimised only for the Microsoft Windows NT

operating system. Sybase continues to offer

versions for Windows, several varieties of                  IQ  buiPldoewrer
Unix, and for Linux.                                Sybase

Sybase makes a number of other data management      Other data
products including Sybase IQ, a Data Warehouse
                                                    Management

system, Power builder, a client-server and n-tier   sReerpvleicrationproductsm-Busseinrveesrs
application development system, m-Business
Server, a mobile applications system based on
the AvantGo service, and Replication Server, a

vendor-neutral data movement system. This is

illustrated in Figure 5.10. Sybase has a strong

presence in the health care and financial markets.  Figure 5.10: Other data management products
                                                                          of Sybase

                   104
                                                DATA MINING AND WAREHOUSE SYSTEMS l CHAPTER 5

   5.2.1 Sybase Warehousing

Sybase illustrates data warehousing as the process of integrating information from a variety
of sources, at regular intervals, to construct an integrated view of the business, combined
with query-optimised technologies for interactive analysis.

Sybase has a complete range of products as part of its data warehouse offering such as:

 Database servers mainly optimised for the special query requirements of
 the interactive warehouse: Sybase SQL Server for mixed-mode data
 warehouses (databases that are updated and queried at the same time),
 Sybase MPP for huge systems with terabytes of data and thousands of users,
 SQL Anywhere Professional for mobile and personal data marts, and Sybase
 IQ for decision support and complex data analysis.

 Middleware for access to multiple data sources on varied systems: With the
 Enterprise Connect family of products, you can access more than 25 data
 sources, including DB2, IDMS, IMS, VSAM, Oracle, Informix, and AS/400.

 Integration and management of data movement and delivery within the
 enterprise warehouse environment: InfoPump, Sybase's low-end data movement
 option, performs summaries and aggregations to data before delivery to the
 warehouse. This is highly useful for smaller data warehouses and data marts. Sybase's
 Replication Server is suitable for a large enterprise's interactive warehouse. It
 provides high-performance, automated, high-volume data distribution and management
 within highly heterogeneous and dynamic interactive warehouse environments.

 Development tools: PowerBuilder, Power++ (formerly Optima++), InfoMaker, Power J,
 and S-Designer, which was recently renamed PowerDesigner. InfoMaker is an end-user
 query and reporting tool designed for individual access to warehouse data for
 reporting. PowerDesigner V6 has been enhanced to include Warehouse Architect. It
 has a warehouse model design capacity and direct interface into Sybase IQ.

Mechanism of this architecture is integrated to support Sybase's so-called "Interactive
warehouse" strategy. The architecture contains of processes, products, and data from
Sybase and other databases. These are incorporated into an end-to-end framework to collect
data from numerous sources (legacy and mainframe databases, applications, and external
data sources). They also apply conversion and transformations logic to present the data
in useful business terms. This architecture includes tools to automate and manage the
distribution of the data to the Data Warehouses and data marts, and tools to store the data
in preparation for end users accessing the data from any of the standard query reporting
tools and applications.

                                                                  105
CHAPTER 5 l DATA MINING AND WAREHOUSE SYSTEMS

5.2.2 Sybase IQ

From view of Data Warehousing, Sybase IQ (Interactive Query Accelerator) is the central
component. Sybase IQ is a DBMS server that is specifically designed for decision-support
databases and complex data analysis queries.

Sybase IQ was specially designed for interactive Data Warehousing. Architected around
Sybase's patented Bit-Wise query-processing technology, it uses highly developed
performance-optimised algorithms for complex ad hoc queries. This technology provides
five to 500 times faster ad hoc query performance than traditional Relational Database
Management Systems (RDBMSs), even with changing user queries. Sybase claims that
Sybase IQ requires much less resource-intensive tuning to obtain excellent performance
than a traditional RDBMS requires.

Sybase IQ is compact in the Sybase Open Architecture. Sybase IQ method supports a
collection of heterogeneous data sources (including accessing data directly from
Sybase SQL Server or, through a gateway, from any of more than 20 supported data
sources such as Oracle, DB2, Informix, and flat files). It can be accessed from a
broad range of popular, off-the-shelf query tools (such as Business Objects and
Cognos Impromptu).

This method also supports a standard relational                   Processes
framework. It processes regular SQL commands                     regular SQL
and supports Sybase's Open Client interfaces,                    commands
DB-Library, Client-Library, and ODBC client
calls as shown in Figure 5.11.                        ODBC                     Supports
                                                   client calls                Sybase's
Its integrated catalog can serve both Sybase                                  open client
IQ and Sybase SQL Server, allowing DBAs to                       Sybase IQ    interfaces
manage security and other administrative services
consistently throughout the Sybase environment.    Client-Library  DB-Library
It uses the typical SQL Server data definition
language, with extensions for the Sybase IQ
access methods.

This architecture can also be used to allow        Figure 5.11: Application of Sybase IQ
transactions and queries designed for execution

by an operational data store to be passed

through and executed transparently by an attached database. This allows building

high-performance environments that support both interactive analysis and realtime

updates.

                 106
                                                DATA MINING AND WAREHOUSE SYSTEMS l CHAPTER 5

   5.2.3 Features

Sybase IQ incorporates numerous innovative features, including advanced indexing and
access methods, pre-optimised and ad hoc join strategies, data reduction, and partitioning
techniques.

   5.2.4 Bit-Wise Indexing

Sybase IQ stores data in an extremely different manner from conventional RDBMS's. A copy
of the data is stored in a column-oriented format (as an alternative of a row-oriented
format, as in a conventional RDBMS).

        Real values of data are indexed in arrays of bits for each column, called Bit-Wise
        indexes.

        The index either contains different values if there are a few (up to 1,000)
        or it contains slices of values for larger numbers of distinct values.

In both these cases, structures can be manipulated through simple binary operations.
These Bit-Wise indexes can be applied to all data, for data elements with large numbers
of repeating values, as well as for data elements with large numbers of distinct values.
They can group and aggregate data quickly; they also count, identify, and present detailed
level records back to the user.

Sybase IQ's Bit-Wise indexing resolves queries by professionally combining and
manipulating only relevant data, without scanning large amounts of raw data; often it
does not access any raw data at all. Because Sybase IQ's Bit-Wise indexing accesses
only the smallest amount of data needed to resolve each query, Sybase IQ can rapidly
process almost any query, whether preplanned or ad hoc. Accessing the data stored in a
column-oriented format eliminates accessing and processing irrelevant data. Because most
Decision-Support System (DSS) queries access a relatively lower number of columns across
a large number of rows, this technique eliminates a great deal of unnecessary I/O. In a
worst scenario, Sybase IQ would scan an entire column rather than do a full table scans.

The Bit-Wise indexing method reduces index data structures to as little as 20 percent of
the size required for equivalent B-tree index used by a traditional RDBMS. Data reduction
and compression method enables the entire database to be fully indexed on each column and
made available for ad hoc query in less space than it normally takes to store raw data
alone. It does not require the ongoing maintenance tasks, as most other relational indexing
techniques do.

It helps to add new data values to data structures without the need to rebuild or reorganise

                                                                  107
CHAPTER 5 l DATA MINING AND WAREHOUSE SYSTEMS

these structures. This makes quick access to current information. With Bit-Wise indexing
methodology, Sybase IQ can resolve queries without tuning. The Bit-Wise methodology
can handle ad hoc queries with little optimisation. Sybase IQ resolves queries using only
information that is directly relevant to each query. Administrators do not need to define
all of the specific queries and operations in advance in order to provide high performance.
The access methods are data-dependent, not query-dependent, so data warehouse users can
pretence an unlimited number of complex ad hoc queries without need query or any specific
tuning by the DBA.

Compression

Data columns are easier to compress than rows (rows contain mixed data types and columns

of varying widths) Sybase IQ can store raw data on disk in as little as 40 to 50 percent

of the size of the original raw data. This will

reduce the I/O required to read that same                        High-cardinality
data back from disk at query time.                                     B-trees

Database Access Methods                          Bit-Wise indexes           Database           Lobiwt-cmaarpdisnality
                                                                              access
Sybase IQ builds efficient and compact
secondary structures on each column as                                      methods
the data is being loaded. This method of
structures further speeds up access to,                          Figure 5.12: Features included
and filtering of, information in the column.                       in database access methods
These structures include variations on high-
cardinality B-trees, low-cardinality bitmaps,
and the Bit-Wise indexes described previously.
This is illustrated in Figure 5.12.

These data structures are optimised for the query operations and data characteristics that
are typical of decision-support applications.

The query optimiser automatically picks the best obtainable access methods and algorithms
for executing each individual query. By wisely combining all of the capabilities described
earlier, Sybase IQ performs efficiently and consistently across the vast array of complex
queries typical of decision-support analysis, without manual intervention.

Data Loading

Sybase IQ 11.1 will load data from a large array of data sources, including several BCP
(Bulk Copy Program) formats, fixed-column width EBCDIC, ASCII or binary data, variable-
column width EBCDIC, or ASCII data using delimiters.

The fixed-format binary data can be loaded from a various type of machines and can be
converted automatically to the alignment of the target database (for example, Big Endian

              108
                                                DATA MINING AND WAREHOUSE SYSTEMS l CHAPTER 5

format data from Sun, HP, IBM, or most other RISC systems can be loaded into Little
Endian format databases such as Intel or DEC, or vice versa).
Prejoin Indexes
Sybase IQ gives an advantage of the known join relationships between the tables by
allowing you to define the join indexes between them in advance. These join indexes decrease
the processing required to process join queries at run time. The join indexes are
supplemented by various join algorithms, such as the sort-merge and nested loop techniques.
Relational and Multidimensional Data
Data Sybase IQ can contain relational data models or multidimensional data models, without
the need to preaggregate the detailed data. It can execute data summary functions
dynamically, therefore allowing you to use standard query tools to drill down to the detailed
data.
Smaller Memory Footprint
In Sybase IQ 11.1, the sum of memory required for each user has been reduced. This
increases the concurrent users who can access the interactive data warehouse. This
memory saving can be endorsed to several factors as depicted in Figure 5.13.

  Reduced per-thread memory:
    Sybase IQ uses native operating system kernel threads to offer opportunistic
    parallelism, which allows it to take advantage of parallel processing to speed
    up compute-intensive tasks. When doing so it does not have any adverse impact
    on other users and a savings of between 5 MB and 10 MB per user have been
    achieved over previous releases.

  Reduced sort-merge memory:
    This method is used by many operations in complex query processing. Sybase IQ
    11.1 uses a new sort-merge technique that considerably reduces the memory
    utilisation of each sorting task.

  Sybase workspace:

     Sybase IQ 11.2 provides all users a single workspace to share so that extensive
     queries can draw from a pool of memory at run time. This relieves the Data Base
     Administrator (DBA) from calculating and allocating memory per user in advance.

                                    Figure 5.13: Factors of memory saving in Sybase IQ

                                                                  109
 CHAPTER 5 l DATA MINING AND WAREHOUSE SYSTEMS

   5.2.5 Performance Enhancements

Sybase IQ 11.1 and 11.2 have five main areas of recital improvement over previous releases
as listed in Figure 5.14.

   Group by: High-performance combination is essential for many queries found in
   DSSs. Sybase IQ 11.1 uses new algorithms -- based on the number of groups, number
   of different elements, and other factors -- to choose among its execution strategies.
   This results in better performance on a wide range of grouping queries.

   IN list: OLAP tools make wide use of the IN (...) SQL construct, frequently with a
   very large number of entries in the list. Sybase IQ 11.1 has taken a new approach
   to this problem by combining column-oriented processing with hashing techniques to
   get better performance of IN lists containing thousands of values.

   Subquery: Queries or Subqueries containing other queries often cause performance
   problems in some relational databases. Sybase IQ 11.1 introduced numerous new
   approaches to subquery execution that draw strongly on its column-oriented processing
   and its ability to use the cache to emphasise reuse of the consistent portions of
   each query expression.

   Improved costing model: Sybase IQ 11.1 has extensively improved the costing
   portion of the query optimiser. These changes offer the optimiser with better
   information on how to choose an optimal execution plan for each query. Choosing
   the finest execution plan is critical to the performance of ad hoc join queries.

   New join algorithm: One of the popular data models for data warehouse today is
   called star schema. A star schema consists of a central table (called the fact
   table) bounded by a series of smaller tables (called dimension tables). In a
   star schema, there are millions of fact records that contain only a few numeric
   columns and a relatively small number of dimension table records that provide
   meaning to the facts. Some relational join algorithms do a poor performance of
   joining the relatively small dimension tables with very large fact table, causing
   very slow query performance. Sybase IQ 11.1 has a new hash join algorithm that
   provides important improvement in join queries over the traditional relational
   join methods when used on star schema queries.

                    Figure 5.14: Five main areas of recital improvement of Sybase IQ 11.1 and 11.2

   5.2.6 Using Sybase IQ

Sybase IQ has a single install utility which sets up and starts up Sybase IQ and the
Sybase server components that must be installed. If a database is already available, you
can run a template command to generate the scripts required to create Sybase IQ indexes.
(The warehouse indexes and warehouse index space can also be created directly from
PowerDesigner's Warehouse Architect.)

                                                                  110
                                                DATA MINING AND WAREHOUSE SYSTEMS l CHAPTER 5

Once the index space has been created, data can be loaded through the IQ_LOAD
utility, which simultaneously indexes the data that is loaded from flat files, from Sybase
SQL Server databases, or from other relational databases, through SQL select statements.
Server administration presently is performed through a command-line interface, but
Platinum Technology Inc. (Oakbrook Terrace, Ill.) has developed a Sybase IQ Desktop
DBA module.
Once the data is loaded, users can query any aspects through query and reporting tools,
including Microsoft Access (Microsoft Inc., Redmond, Wash.), Impromptu (Cognos Inc.,
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada), BusinessObjects (Business Objects Inc., Cupertino, Calif.),
Forest & Trees (Platinum Technology Inc., Oakbrook Terrace, Ill.), and SAS Assist (SAS
Institute Inc., Cary, N.C.). Access through db-Lib and Sybase's CT-Lib is also supported,
along with ODBC.
After all data are loaded and set up, there is only very little administration and tuning to
be done. This is because warehouse is pretended according to nature of the data and not
according to the nature of the queries. The system does not have to be retuned as the nature
of the queries evolves over time.

   SELF-CHECK

                Find out the unique features of Sybase warehouse system.

    5.3 IBM

Data mining technologies from IBM is used to detect fraud, prevent customer churn,
segment your customers, and simplify market basket analysis. The in-database data mining
capabilities incorporate with existing systems to provide scalable, high performing
predictive and pattern analysis without moving your data into proprietary data mining
platforms.

   5.3.1 Unique features of InfoSphere Warehouse Data Mining

Unique features of InfoSphere warehouse data mining are listed in Figure 5.15.

      Highly scalable, state-of-the-art data mining algorithms

     A Profit from IBM's state-of-the art technology, providing you with reliable,

             innovative algorithms for data analysis.

                                                                  111
 CHAPTER 5 l DATA MINING AND WAREHOUSE SYSTEMS

      Efficient and secure in-database processing

     B Process your data directly in the database, without taking the effort and

               potential security risks of copying it to an external system.

      Easy to use even without in-depth data mining knowledge
               Apply data mining in a simple and intuitive way without complex setups or

     C parameterisation using the easy mining interfaces and the interactive flow

               creation of the design studio.

      Easy integration with other components
               Integrate your solutions with different front-ends, infrastructures, other

     D databases and reporting tools (such as Cognos) through the powerful IBM

               data mining SQL API.

      Supports relevant standards

     E Store, share and apply models across different applications using the Predictive

               Model Markup Language (PMML).

                           Figure 5.15: Unique features of InfoSphere warehouse data mining

   5.3.2 Modelling

Data mining process starts with chronological data being gathered and put through a
series of mathematical functions to derive business rules such as "Customers buying
Gouda cheese are likely to also buy mixed nuts 58% of the time." Business rules are
collected together into a data mining model. Data mining models are represented using
the Predictive Model Markup Language (PMML), which is used to exchange mining models
with other data mining tools like SAS or SPSS. Design studio gives a convenient
graphical environment for data modelling.

   5.3.3 Visualisation

Visualisation of data mining models is a key functionality to evaluate the mining results.
The powerful data mining visualisation capabilities within InfoSphere warehouse enable to
get fast insight into the discovered business rules.

   5.3.4 Scoring

The confirmed business rules can be applied to new data to determine the appropriate
predicted outcome. For example, a bank transaction enters the system and the fraud

                                                                  112
                  DATA MINING AND WAREHOUSE SYSTEMS l CHAPTER 5

detection rules are applied against the data. The rules will forecast probability that
the record is fraudulent. This course of applying the business rules is called scoring.
Scoring in real time allows businesses to find fraudulent records faster, segment new
customers and offer them better service, and detect defects quicker. InfoSphere Warehouse
Data Mining performs Scoring in a straight line in the database. This makes sure a
maximum of efficiency and security and allows you to embed Data Mining directly into
your business processes.

SELF-CHECK        Define the features of InfoSphere warehouse system.
                  Try to find out other warehouse systems used by IBM.
              1.
              2.

SUMMARY

1. This module explains about different data mining and warehouse systems used by
     current industry.

2. In this chapter, you have learnt Oracle data warehouse system and their
     functionalities. Additionally you have understood the different servers used by
     Oracle and also compression, and application clusters techniques used by the
     Oracle server.

3. In addition, this module pointed out the importance of Sybase warehouse systems and
     their features.

4. Finally, you have learnt about the, IBM warehouse systems and also this chapter
     explains what are data mining techniques use by IBM systems and also illustrate the
     features of InfoSphere warehouse data mining.

glossary

Key Performance   - Key Performance Indicators (KPI) are financial and
Indicators (KPI)         non-financial measures or metrics used to help an
                         organisation define and evaluate how successful it
                         is, typically in terms of making progress towards
                         its long-term organisational goals. The KPIs differ
                         depending on the nature of the organisation and the
                         organisation's strategy.

                  113
CHAPTER 5 l DATA MINING AND WAREHOUSE SYSTEMS

Oracle Database   - The Oracle database (commonly referred to as Oracle
                         RDBMS or simply Oracle) consists of a Relational
Predictive Model         Database Management System (RDBMS) produced and
Markup Language          marketed by Oracle corporation.
(PMML)
                  - The Predictive Model Markup Language (PMML) is an
RDBMS                    XML-based markup language developed by the Data
Sybase IQ                Mining Group (DMG) to provide a way for applications
                         to define statistical and data mining models and to
                         share models between PMML-compliant applications.

                  - Searching, selecting, and retrieving of actual data from a
                         personnel file, data bank, or other file.

                  - Sybase IQ, formally Sybase Adaptive Server IQ, is a
                         relational database software system used for data
                         warehousing, produced by the Sybase corporation.
                         Sybase IQ now powers the world's largest Data
                         Warehouse implemented in history, consisting of over
                         one petabyte (1,000 terabytes) of structured and
                         unstructured data, designed and implemented by
                         BMMSoft.

reference

     Books

     Gupta, H., Harinarayan, V., Rajaraman, A., & Ullman, J. Index Selection for OLAP:
     In Proceedings of the International.

     John Wang. (2009). Encyclopedia of Data Warehousing and Mining (2nd ed.).
     Information science Reference publishers.

     Yannis Kotidis. (2002). Handbook of Massive Data Sets. chap. Aggregate View
     Management in Data Warehouses. Kluwer publications.

     Surajit Chaudhuri, & Umesh Dayal. (1997). An overview of Data Warehousing and
     OLAP Technology.

     Robert Stackowiak, Joseph Rayman, & Rick Greenwald. Oracle Data Warehousing and
     Business Intelligence Solutions. Wiley Publishing, Inc.

                  114
                                               DATA MINING AND WAREHOUSE SYSTEMS l CHAPTER 5

multiple choice questions

1. __________ uses OLAP functionality for analytical process of database.
       A. SYBASE
       B. IBM
       C. ORACLE
       D. None of the above

2. HP Oracle database machine is used by ___________ as a high performed data storage
       solution.
       A. Oracle
       B. HP
       C. IBM
       D. Cisco

3. Oracle (Database 11g) warehouse builder consists of __________ and _________
       options.
       A. base product, ETL option and connectors
       B. ETL option and connectors
       C. ETL option and base product
       D. B and C

4. Partitioning table enables ___________ strategies within the Oracle database.
       A. ILM (Information Library Management)
       B. ILM (Information Life product Management)
       C. ILM (Information Lifecycle Material)
       D. ILM (Information Lifecycle Management)

5. In Oracle warehouse facilitate a single database to scale across multiple servers feature
       is provides by __________.
       A. real application clusters
       B. real application servers
       C. OLAP
       D. none of the above

6. Own calculation engine, statistics products and also own data engine is contain by
       __________ technology in Oracle.
       A. OLPA
       B. MOLAP
       C. OLAP
       D. All of the above

7. KPI is also known as ______________.

                                                                 115
CHAPTER 5 l DATA MINING AND WAREHOUSE SYSTEMS

       A. Key Performance Information
       B. Key Performance Indicators
       C. Key Product Indicators
       D. Key Product Information

8. Bit-Wise query-processing technology is used by ________.
       A. DBMS
       B. Oracle
       C. Sybase IQ
       D. IBM

9. ____________ data mining technologies is used to detect fraud.
       A. IBM
       B. Oracle
       C. Sybase IQ
       D. B & C

10. IBM uses __________ application to store, share and apply.
       A. Predictive Markup Language (PML)
       B. Predictive Model Markup Language (PMML)
       C. A and B
       D. None of the above

multiple choice questions

1. Oracle database 11v offers best-of-breed functionality for data warehouses and data
       mine, with confirmed scalability to 100's of terabytes and record-breaking performance.
       A. TRUE
       B. FALSE

2. HP Oracle database machine provides high-performance warehousing, and extensive
       hardware support for warehouse system.
       A. TRUE
       B. FALSE

3. Oracle exadata storage server is used to build data warehousing solutions using cus-
       tomer supplied database servers and infrastructure.
       A. TRUE
       B. FALSE

4. Oracle Warehouse Builder (OWB) have feature of application connectors for Oracle
       e-Business Suite.

                                                                 116
                                              DATA MINING AND WAREHOUSE SYSTEMS l CHAPTER 5

       A. TRUE
       B. FALSE
5. Oracle database has a broad set of loading, security and compression capabilities as a
       key feature.
       A. TRUE
       B. FALSE
6. "Divide and Conquer" technique for managing large tables in database method is used
       by Oracle partitioning.
       A. TRUE
       B. FALSE
7. Oracle data management system is powerful software which helps to discover new in-
       sights hidden in data.
       A. TRUE
       B. FALSE
8. DB2, IDMS are enterprise connectivity products which are mainly used by Sybase
       warehousing.
       A. TRUE
       B. FALSE
9. InfoSphere warehouse data mining technologies are used by IBM corporation.
       A. TRUE
       B. FALSE
10. Visualisation of data mining models is the key functionality to evaluate mining results
       is used by IBM InfoBase warehousing system.
       A. TRUE
       B. FALSE

                                                                117
